                                          User Authentication




In most computer security contexts, user authentication is the fundamental
building
block and the primary line of defense. User authentication is the basis for most
types of access control and for user accountability.




                                                                                   1
                               RFC 2828

               RFC 2828 defines user authentication as:
            “The process of verifying an identity claimed by
                         or for a system entity.”




RFC 2828 defines user authentication as follows:


The process of verifying an identity claimed by or for a system entity.




                                                                          2
                 Authentication Process

         ⚫ fundamental building               ⚫ identification step
                                                    ⚫ presenting an identifier
            block and primary
                                                       to the security system
            line of defense
                                              ⚫ verification step
                                                    ⚫ presenting or
         ⚫ basis for access                            generating
                                                       authentication
            control and user                           information that
            accountability                             corroborates the
                                                       binding between
                                                       the entity and the
                                                       identifier




An authentication process consists of two steps:


 Identification step: Presenting an identifier to the security system.
(Identifiers
should be assigned carefully, because authenticated identities are the basis for
other security services, such as access control service.)


 Verification step: Presenting or generating authentication information
that
corroborates the binding between the entity and the identifier.


For example, user Alice Toklas could have the user identifier ABTOKLAS. This
information needs to be stored on any server or computer system that Alice
wishes
to use and could be known to system administrators and other users. A typical
item
of authentication information associated with this user ID is a password, which
is




                                                                                   3
kept secret (known only to Alice and to the system)2. If no one is able to obtain
or
guess Alice’s password, then the combination of Alice’s user ID and password
enables
administrators to set up Alice’s access permissions and audit her activity.
Because
Alice’s ID is not secret, system users can send her e-mail, but because her
password is
secret, no one can pretend to be Alice.


In essence, identification is the means by which a user provides a claimed
identity
to the system; user authentication is the means of establishing the validity of
the claim.
Note that user authentication is distinct from message authentication. As
defined in
Chapter 2, message authentication is a procedure that allows communicating
parties
to verify that the contents of a received message have not been altered and
that the
source is authentic. This chapter is concerned solely with user authentication.




                                                                                    3
                User Authentication
             the four means of authenticating user
                     identity are based on:
          something      something      something      something
          the individual the individual the individual the individual
          knows          possesses      is (static     does
          • password,    (token)        biometrics)    (dynamic
            PIN, answers • smartcard,   • fingerprint, biometrics)
            to               electronic       retina, face    • voice pattern,
            prearranged      keycard,                           handwriting,
            questions        physical key                       typing rhythm




There are four general means of authenticating a user's identity, which can be used
alone or in combination:


• Something the individual knows: Examples includes a password, a personal
identification number (PIN), or answers to a prearranged set of questions.


• Something the individual possesses: Examples include electronic keycards, smart
cards, and physical keys. This type of authenticator is referred to as a token.


• Something the individual is (static biometrics): Examples include recognition by
fingerprint, retina, and face.


• Something the individual does (dynamic biometrics): Examples include
recognition by voice pattern, handwriting characteristics, and typing rhythm.


All of these methods, properly implemented and used, can provide secure user
authentication. However, each method has problems. An adversary may be able to
guess or steal a password. Similarly, an adversary may be able to forge or steal a
token. A user may forget a password or lose a token. Further, there is a significant



                                                                                       4
administrative overhead for managing password and token information on systems
and securing such information on systems. With respect to biometric authenticators,
there are a variety of problems, including dealing with false positives and false
negatives, user acceptance, cost, and convenience.




                                                                                      4
               Password Authentication

         ⚫ widely used line of defense against intruders
            ⚫ user provides name/login and password
            ⚫ system compares password with the one stored for that
               specified login

         ⚫ the user ID:
            ⚫ determines that the user is authorized to access the system
            ⚫ determines the user’s privileges
            ⚫ is used in discretionary access control




A widely used line of defense against intruders is the password system.
Virtually all
multiuser systems, network-based servers, Web-based e-commerce sites, and
other
similar services require that a user provide not only a name or identifier (ID)
but
also a password. The system compares the password to a previously stored
password
for that user ID, maintained in a system password file. The password serves
to authenticate the ID of the individual logging on to the system. In turn, the ID
provides security in the following ways:


• The ID determines whether the user is authorized to gain access to a
system.
In some systems, only those who already have an ID filed on the system are
allowed to gain access.


• The ID determines the privileges accorded to the user. A few users may have




                                                                                     5
supervisory or “superuser” status that enables them to read files and perform
functions that are especially protected by the operating system. Some systems
have guest or anonymous accounts, and users of these accounts have more
limited privileges than others.


The ID is used in what is referred to as discretionary access control. For
example,
by listing the IDs of the other users, a user may grant permission to them
to read files owned by that user.




                                                                                5
                  Password Vulnerabilities

             offline         password
                             guessing        workstatio n   electronic
           dictionary
             attack
                              against         hijacking     monitoring
                            sing le user




                                                             exploitin g
            specific          popu lar        exploitin g
                                                              multiple
            account          password           user
                                                             password
             attack            attack         mistakes
                                                                use




In this subsection, we outline the main forms of attack against password-based
authentication and briefly outline a countermeasure strategy. The remainder of
Section 3.2 goes into more detail on the key countermeasures.



We can identify the following attack strategies:


• Offline dictionary attack: Typically, strong access controls are used to
protect
the system’s password file. However, experience shows that determined
hackers can frequently bypass such controls and gain access to the file. The
attacker obtains the system password file and compares the password hashes
against hashes of commonly used passwords. If a match is found, the attacker
can gain access by that ID/password combination.


• Specific account attack: The attacker targets a specific account and
submits




                                                                                 6
password guesses until the correct password is discovered.


• Popular password attack: A variation of the preceding attack is to use a
popular
password and try it against a wide range of user IDs. A user’s tendency
is to choose a password that is easily remembered; this unfortunately makes
the password easy to guess.


• Password guessing against single user: The attacker attempts to gain
knowledge
about the account holder and system password policies and uses that
knowledge to guess the password.


• Workstation hijacking; The attacker waits until a logged-in workstation
is
unattended.


• Exploiting user mistakes: If the system assigns a password, then the
user is
more likely to write it down because it is difficult to remember. This situation
creates the potential for an adversary to read the written password. A user
may intentionally share a password, to enable a colleague to share files, for
example. Also, attackers are frequently successful in obtaining passwords by
using social engineering tactics that trick the user or an account manager into
revealing a password. Many computer systems are shipped with preconfigured
passwords for system administrators. Unless these preconfigured passwords
are changed, they are easily guessed.


• Exploiting multiple password use. Attacks can also become much more
effective or damaging if different network devices share the same or a similar
password for a given user.


• Electronic monitoring: If a password is communicated across a




                                                                                   6
network to
log on to a remote system, it is vulnerable to eavesdropping. Simple
encryption
will not fix this problem, because the encrypted password is, in effect, the
password and can be observed and reused by an adversary




                                                                               6
                       Countermeasures
         ⚫ controls to prevent unauthorized access to password file

         ⚫ intrusion detection measures

         ⚫ rapid reissuance of compromised passwords

         ⚫ account lockout mechanisms

         ⚫ policies to inhibit users from selecting common passwords

         ⚫ training in and enforcement of password policies

         ⚫ automatic workstation logout

         ⚫ policies against similar passwords on network devices

         ⚫ Multi-factor authetication




Typically, a system that uses password-based authentication maintains a
password
file indexed by user ID. One technique that is typically used is to store not the
user’s
password but a one-way hash function of the password, as described
subsequently.


• Offline dictionary attack: Countermeasures include
controls to prevent unauthorized access to the password file, intrusion
detection
measures to identify a compromise, and rapid reissuance of passwords
should the password file be compromised.


• Specific account attack: The standard countermeasure
is an account lockout mechanism, which locks out access to the
account after a number of failed login attempts. Typical practice is no more
than five access attempts.




                                                                                    7
• Popular password attack: Countermeasures include policies to inhibit the
selection by users of common passwords and scanning the IP addresses of
authentication requests and client cookies for submission patterns.


• Password guessing against single user: Countermeasures include
training in and
enforcement of password policies that make passwords difficult to guess.
Such policies address the secrecy, minimum length of the password, character
set, prohibition against using well-known user identifiers, and length of time
before the password must be changed.


• Workstation hijacking; The standard countermeasure is automatically
logging the workstation
out after a period of inactivity. Intrusion detection schemes can be
used to detect changes in user behavior.


• Exploiting user mistakes: Countermeasures include user training,
intrusion detection, and simpler passwords combined with another
authentication
mechanism.


• Exploiting multiple password use. Countermeasures include a policy that
forbids the
same or similar password on particular network devices.


• Electronic monitoring: If a password is communicated across a
network to
log on to a remote system, it is vulnerable to eavesdropping. Simple
encryption
will not fix this problem, because the encrypted password is, in effect, the
password and can be observed and reused by an adversary




                                                                                 7
          Use of
         Hashed
        Passwords



A widely used password security technique is the use of hashed passwords
and a salt
value. This scheme is found on virtually all UNIX variants as well as on a
number
of other operating systems. The following procedure is employed (Figure
3.1a). To
load a new password into the system, the user selects or is assigned a
password. This
password is combined with a fixed-length salt value [MORR79]. In older
implementations,
this value is related to the time at which the password is assigned to the user.
Newer implementations use a pseudorandom or random number. The
password
and salt serve as inputs to a hashing algorithm to produce a fixed-length hash
code.
The hash algorithm is designed to be slow to execute to thwart attacks. The
hashed
password is then stored, together with a plaintext copy of the salt, in the
password



                                                                                   8
file for the corresponding user ID. The hashed-password method has been
shown to
be secure against a variety of cryptanalytic attacks [WAGN00].


When a user attempts to log on to a UNIX system, the user provides an ID
and a password (Figure 3.1b). The operating system uses the ID to index into
the
password file and retrieve the plaintext salt and the encrypted password. The
salt
and user-supplied password are used as input to the encryption routine. If the
result
matches the stored value, the password is accepted.


The salt serves three purposes:


• It prevents duplicate passwords from being visible in the password file. Even
if
two users choose the same password, those passwords will be assigned
different
salt values. Hence, the hashed passwords of the two users will differ.


• It greatly increases the difficulty of offline dictionary attacks. For a salt of
length b bits, the number of possible passwords is increased by a factor of 2b,
increasing the difficulty of guessing a password in a dictionary attack.


• It becomes nearly impossible to find out whether a person with passwords on
two or more systems has used the same password on all of them.


To see the second point, consider the way that an offline dictionary attack
would work. The attacker obtains a copy of the password file. Suppose first
that
the salt is not used. The attacker’s goal is to guess a single password. To that
end,
the attacker submits a large number of likely passwords to the hashing




                                                                                     8
function.
If any of the guesses matches one of the hashes in the file, then the attacker
has found a password that is in the file. But faced with the UNIX scheme, the
attacker must take each guess and submit it to the hash function once for each
salt value in the dictionary file, multiplying the number of guesses that must be
checked.


There are two threats to the UNIX password scheme. First, a user can gain
access on a machine using a guest account or by some other means and then
run a
password guessing program, called a password cracker, on that machine. The
attacker
should be able to check many thousands of possible passwords with little
resource
consumption. In addition, if an opponent is able to obtain a copy of the
password
file, then a cracker program can be run on another machine at leisure. This
enables
the opponent to run through millions of possible passwords in a reasonable
period.




                                                                                    8
                  UNIX Implementation
                                original scheme
                                • up to eight printable characters in length
                                • 12-bit salt used to modify DES encryption
                                  into a one-way hash function
                                • zero value repeatedly encrypted 25 times
                                • output translated to 11 character
                                  sequence




                                        now regarded as inadequate
                                        • still often required for compatibility with
                                          existing account management software
                                          or multivendor environments




Since the original development of UNIX, most implementations
have relied on the following password scheme. Each user selects a password
of up to eight printable characters in length. This is converted into a 56-bit
value
(using 7-bit ASCII) that serves as the key input to an encryption routine. The
hash
routine, known as crypt(3), is based on DES. A 12-bit salt value is used. The
modified
DES algorithm is executed with a data input consisting of a 64-bit block of
zeros. The
output of the algorithm then serves as input for a second encryption. This
process is
repeated for a total of 25 encryptions. The resulting 64-bit output is then
translated
into an 11-character sequence. The modification of the DES algorithm converts
it
into a one-way hash function. The crypt(3) routine is designed to discourage
guessing
attacks. Software implementations of DES are slow compared to hardware



                                                                                        9
versions,
and the use of 25 iterations multiplies the time required by 25.


This particular implementation is now considered woefully inadequate. For
example, [PERR03] reports the results of a dictionary attack using a
supercomputer.
The attack was able to process over 50 million password guesses in about 80
minutes.
Further, the results showed that for about $10,000 anyone should be able to
do the
same in a few months using one uniprocessor machine. Despite its known
weaknesses,
this UNIX scheme is still often required for compatibility with existing account
management
software or in multivendor environments.




                                                                                   9
              Improved Implementations

                                                                       OpenBSD uses Blowfish
                                                                       block cipher based hash
                                                                       algorithm called Bcrypt
                                                                       • most secure version of Unix
          much stronger hash/salt                                        ha sh/salt sche me
           schemes available for                                       • uses 128-bit salt to create
                   Unix                                                  192-bit hash value




                                    recommended hash
                                    function is based on
                                    MD5
                                    • sa lt of up to 48-bits
                                    • pa ssword length is unlimite d
                                    • produces 128-bit hash
                                    • uses an inner loop with 1000
                                      iterations to achieve slowdown




There are other, much stronger, hash/salt schemes available for UNIX. The
recommended hash function for many UNIX systems, including Linux, Solaris,
and FreeBSD (a widely used open source UNIX), is based on the MD5 secure
hash algorithm (which is similar to, but not as secure as SHA-1). The MD5
crypt
routine uses a salt of up to 48 bits and effectively has no limitations on
password
length. It produces a 128-bit hash value. It is also far slower than crypt(3). To
achieve the slowdown, MD5 crypt uses an inner loop with 1000 iterations.


Probably the most secure version of the UNIX hash/salt scheme was
developed
for OpenBSD, another widely used open source UNIX. This scheme, reported
in
[PROV99], uses a hash function based on the Blowfish symmetric block
cipher. The
hash function, called Bcrypt, is quite slow to execute. Bcrypt allows passwords
of




                                                                                                       10
up to 55 characters in length and requires a random salt value of 128 bits, to
produce
a 192-bit hash value. Bcrypt also includes a cost variable; an increase in the
cost
variable causes a corresponding increase in the time required to perform a
Bcyrpt
hash. The cost assigned to a new password is configurable, so that
administrators can
assign a higher cost to privileged users.




                                                                                 10
                      Password Cracking
          ⚫ dictionary attacks
            ⚫ develop a large dictionary of possible passwords and try each
              against the password file
            ⚫ each password must be hashed using each salt value and then
              compared to stored hash values

          ⚫ rainbow table attacks
            ⚫ pre-compute tables of hash values for all salts
            ⚫ a mammoth table of hash values
            ⚫ can be countered by using a sufficiently large salt value and a
               sufficiently large hash length




The traditional approach to password guessing,
or password cracking as it is called, is to develop a large dictionary of possible
passwords and to try each of these against the password file. This means that
each password must be hashed using each salt value in the password file and
then
compared to stored hash values. If no match is found, then the cracking
program
tries variations on all the words in its dictionary of likely passwords. Such
variations
include backward spelling of words, additional numbers or special characters,
or
sequence of characters,


An alternative is to trade off space for time by precomputing potential hash
values. In this approach the attacker generates a large dictionary of possible
passwords.
For each password, the attacker generates the hash values associated with
each possible salt value. The result is a mammoth table of hash values known




                                                                                     11
as a
rainbow table. For example, [OECH03] showed that using 1.4 GB of data,
he could
crack 99.9% of all alphanumeric Windows password hashes in 13.8 seconds.
This
approach can be countered by using a sufficiently large salt value and a
sufficiently
large hash length. Both the FreeBSD and OpenBSD approaches should be
secure
from this attack for the foreseeable future.




                                                                           11
                      Table 3.1
              Observed Password Lengths




Even the stupendous guessing rates referenced in the preceding section do
not
yet make it feasible for an attacker to use a dumb brute-force technique of
trying
all possible combinations of characters to discover a password. Instead,
password
crackers rely on the fact that some people choose easily guessable
passwords.


Some users, when permitted to choose their own password, pick one that is
absurdly
short. The results of one study at Purdue University are shown in Table 3.1.
The study
observed password change choices on 54 machines, representing
approximately 7000
user accounts. Almost 3% of the passwords were three characters or fewer in
length.
An attacker could begin the attack by exhaustively testing all possible
passwords of



                                                                               12
length 3 or fewer. A simple remedy is for the system to reject any password
choice of
fewer than, say, six characters or even to require that all passwords be exactly
eight
characters in length. Most users would not complain about such a restriction.


Password length is only part of the problem. Many people, when permitted
to choose their own password, pick a password that is guessable, such as
their own
name, their street name, a common dictionary word, and so forth. This makes
the job
of password cracking straightforward. The cracker simply has to test the
password
file against lists of likely passwords. Because many people use guessable
passwords,
such a strategy should succeed on virtually all systems.




                                                                                   12
                                                               Table 3.2

                                                         Passwords
                                                       Cracked from a
                                                       Sample Set of
                                                           13,797
                                                          Accounts


                                                           *Computed as the number of matches
                                                        divided by the searc h siz e. T he more w ords
                                                       that need to be tested for a match, the low er
                                                                   the cos t/b enef it ratio.




One demonstration of the effectiveness of guessing is reported in [KLEI90].
From a variety of sources, the author collected UNIX password files,
containing
nearly 14,000 encrypted passwords. The result, which the author rightly
characterizes
as frightening, is shown in Table 3.2. In all, nearly one-fourth of the passwords
were guessed. The following strategy was used:


1. Try the user’s name, initials, account name, and other relevant
personal information.
In all, 130 different permutations for each user were tried.


2. Try words from various dictionaries. The author compiled a dictionary
of over
60,000 words, including the online dictionary on the system itself, and various
other lists as shown.


3. Try various permutations on the words from step 2. This included



                                                                                                         13
making the
first letter uppercase or a control character, making the entire word uppercase,
reversing the word, changing the letter “o” to the digit “zero,” and so on.
These permutations added another 1 million words to the list.


4. Try various capitalization permutations on the words from step 2 that
were not
considered in step 3. This added almost 2 million additional words to the list.
Thus, the test involved in the neighborhood of 3 million words. Using the
fastest
Thinking Machines implementation listed earlier, the time to encrypt all these
words
for all possible salt values is under an hour. Keep in mind that such a thorough
search
could produce a success rate of about 25%, whereas even a single hit may be
enough
to gain a wide range of privileges on a system.




                                                                                   13
            Password File Access Control
           can block offline guessing attacks by denying access to
           encrypted passwords

               make
             available
              only to
                                vulnerabilities
             privileged
               users



           shadow              weakn ess in     accident      users with
                                                                                              snif f
           password file        the OS that       with          same        access from
                                                                                          passwords in
                                  allows       permissions   password o n     backup
           •a separate f ile                                                                netwo rk
            from the user      access to the    making it       other         media
                                                                                             traffic
            IDs where the           file        readable       systems
            hashed
            passw ords are
            kept




One way to thwart a password attack is to deny the opponent access to the
password
file. If the hashed password portion of the file is accessible only by a privileged
user,
then the opponent cannot read it without already knowing the password of a
privileged
user. Often, the hashed passwords are kept in a separate file from the user
IDs, referred to as a shadow password file. Special attention is paid to
making the
shadow password file protected from unauthorized access. Although password
file
protection is certainly worthwhile, there remain vulnerabilities:


• Many systems, including most UNIX systems, are susceptible to
unanticipated
break-ins. A hacker may be able to exploit a software vulnerability in the
operating system to bypass the access control system long enough to extract
the password file. Alternatively, the hacker may find a weakness in the file




                                                                                                         14
system or database management system that allows access to the file.


• An accident of protection might render the password file readable, thus
compromising
all the accounts.


• Some of the users have accounts on other machines in other protection
domains, and they use the same password. Thus, if the passwords could
be read by anyone on one machine, a machine in another location might be
compromised.


• A lack of or weakness in physical security may provide opportunities for a
hacker. Sometimes there is a backup to the password file on an emergency
repair disk or archival disk. Access to this backup enables the attacker to read
the password file. Alternatively, a user may boot from a disk running another
operating system such as Linux and access the file from this OS.


• Instead of capturing the system password file, another approach to collecting
user IDs and passwords is through sniffing network traffic.


Thus, a password protection policy must complement access control
measures with
techniques to force users to select passwords that are difficult to guess.




                                                                                   14
                    Password Selection Techniques
                                                               user education
          users can be told the im portance of using hard to guess passwords and can be provided w ith guidelines for selecting s trong pa sswords




                                            computer generated passwords
                                                            users have trouble remembering them




                                                 reactive password checking
                                       system perio dic ally runs its own passw ord crac ker to find guessable passw ords




                                               proactive password checking
         user is allowed to select their own password, how ever th e system       goal is to eliminate guessable passwords while allowing the user to
          checks to see if the passw ord is allowable, and if not, rejects it                     selec t a passw ord that is m em orable




The lesson from the two experiments just described (Tables 3.1 and 3.2) is
that,
when not constrained, many users choose a password that is too short or too
easy
to guess. At the other extreme, if users are assigned passwords consisting of
eight
randomly selected printable characters, password cracking is effectively
impossible.
But it would be almost as impossible for most users to remember their
passwords. Fortunately, even if we limit the password universe to strings of
characters
that are reasonably memorable, the size of the universe is still too large to
permit practical cracking. Our goal, then, is to eliminate guessable passwords
while
allowing the user to select a password that is memorable. Four basic
techniques
are in use:




                                                                                                                                                        15
• User education
• Computer-generated passwords
• Reactive password checking
• Proactive password checking


Users can be told the importance of using hard-to-guess passwords and can
be
provided with guidelines for selecting strong passwords. This user education
strategy
is unlikely to succeed at most installations, particularly where there is a large
user population or a lot of turnover. Many users will simply ignore the
guidelines.
Others may not be good judges of what is a strong password. For example,
many
users (mistakenly) believe that reversing a word or capitalizing the last letter
makes
a password unguessable.


Nonetheless, it makes sense to provide users with guidelines on the selection
of passwords. Perhaps the best approach is the following advice: A good
technique
for choosing a password is to use the first letter of each word of a phrase.
However,
don’t pick a well-known phrase like “An apple a day keeps the doctor away”
(Aaadktda). Instead, pick something like “My dog’s first name is Rex” (MdfniR)
or “My sister Peg is 24 years old” (MsPi24yo). Studies have shown that users
can
generally remember such passwords but that they are not susceptible to
password
guessing attacks based on commonly used passwords.


Computer-generated passwords also have problems. If the passwords
are quite
random in nature, users will not be able to remember them. Even if the
password is



                                                                                    15
pronounceable, the user may have difficulty remembering it and so be tempted
to
write it down. In general, computer-generated password schemes have a
history of
poor acceptance by users. FIPS PUB 181 defines one of the best-designed
automated
password generators. The standard includes not only a description of the
approach
but also a complete listing of the C source code of the algorithm. The algorithm
generates words by forming pronounceable syllables and concatenating them
to
form a word. A random number generator produces a random stream of
characters
used to construct the syllables and words.


A reactive password checking strategy is one in which the system
periodically
runs its own password cracker to find guessable passwords. The system
cancels
any passwords that are guessed and notifies the user. This tactic has a
number
of drawbacks. First, it is resource intensive if the job is done right. Because a


determined opponent who is able to steal a password file can devote full CPU
time to the task for hours or even days, an effective reactive password checker
is
at a distinct disadvantage. Furthermore, any existing passwords remain
vulnerable
until the reactive password checker finds them. A good example is the
openware
Jack the Ripper password cracker (openwall.com/john/pro/), which works on a
variety of operating systems.


A promising approach to improved password security is a proactive
password




                                                                                    15
checker. In this scheme, a user is allowed to select his or her own
password. However,
at the time of selection, the system checks to see if the password is allowable
and, if not, rejects it. Such checkers are based on the philosophy that, with
sufficient
guidance from the system, users can select memorable passwords from a
fairly
large password space that are not likely to be guessed in a dictionary attack.


The trick with a proactive password checker is to strike a balance between
user acceptability and strength. If the system rejects too many passwords,
users will
complain that it is too hard to select a password. If the system uses some
simple
algorithm to define what is acceptable, this provides guidance to password
crackers
to refine their guessing technique. In the remainder of this subsection, we look
at
possible approaches to proactive password checking.




                                                                                   15
                       Table 3.3
             Types of Cards Used as Tokens




Objects that a user possesses for the purpose of user authentication are called
tokens. In this section, we examine two types of tokens that are widely used;
these
are cards that have the appearance and size of bank cards (see Table 3.3).




                                                                                  16
                          Memory Cards
         ⚫ can store but do not process data

         ⚫ the most common is the magnetic stripe card

         ⚫ can include an internal electronic memory

         ⚫ can be used alone for physical access
           ⚫ hotel room
           ⚫ ATM

         ⚫ provides significantly greater security when combined with a
            password or PIN
         ⚫ drawbacks of memory cards include:
           ⚫ requires a special reader
           ⚫ loss of token
           ⚫ user dissatisfaction




Memory cards can store but not process data. The most common such card is
the
bank card with a magnetic stripe on the back. A magnetic stripe can store only
a
simple security code, which can be read (and unfortunately reprogrammed) by
an inexpensive card reader. There are also memory cards that include an
internal
electronic memory.


Memory cards can be used alone for physical access, such as a hotel room.
For
computer user authentication, such cards are typically used with some form of
password
or personal identification number (PIN). A typical application is an automatic
teller machine (ATM).


The memory card, when combined with a PIN or password, provides
significantly




                                                                                 17
greater security than a password alone. An adversary must gain physical
possession of the card (or be able to duplicate it) plus must gain knowledge of
the
PIN. Among the potential drawbacks are the following [NIST95]:


• Requires special reader: This increases the cost of using the token and
creates
the requirement to maintain the security of the reader’s hardware and
software.


• Token loss: A lost token temporarily prevents its owner from gaining
system
access. Thus there is an administrative cost in replacing the lost token. In
addition,
if the token is found, stolen, or forged, then an adversary now need only
determine the PIN to gain unauthorized access.


• User dissatisfaction: Although users may have no difficulty in
accepting the
use of a memory card for ATM access, its use for computer access may be
deemed inconvenient.




                                                                                  17
                                  Smartcard
         ⚫ physical characteristics:
               ⚫ include an embedded microprocessor
               ⚫ a smart token that looks like a bank card
               ⚫ can look like calculators, keys, small portable objects

         ⚫ interface:
               ⚫ manual interfaces include a keypad and display for interaction
               ⚫ electronic interfaces communicate with a compatible
                  reader/writer

         ⚫ authentication protocol:
               ⚫ classified into three categories: static, dynamic password
                  generator and challenge-response




A wide variety of devices qualify as smart tokens. These can be categorized
along
three dimensions that are not mutually exclusive:


• Physical characteristics: Smart tokens include an embedded
microprocessor.
A smart token that looks like a bank card is called a smart card. Other smart
tokens can look like calculators, keys, or other small portable objects.


• Interface: Manual interfaces include a keypad and display for
human/token
interaction. Smart tokens with an electronic interface communicate with a
compatible reader/writer.


• Authentication protocol: The purpose of a smart token is to provide a
means
for user authentication. We can classify the authentication protocols used with
smart tokens into three categories:



                                                                                  18
— Static: With a static protocol, the user authenticates himself or herself
to the token and then the token authenticates the user to the computer.
The latter half of this protocol is similar to the operation of a memory
token.


— Dynamic password generator: In this case, the token generates a
unique
password periodically (e.g., every minute). This password is then entered
into the computer system for authentication, either manually by the user or
electronically via the token. The token and the computer system must be
initialized and kept synchronized so that the computer knows the password
that is current for this token.


— Challenge-response: In this case, the computer system generates a
challenge,
such as a random string of numbers. The smart token generates a response
based on the challenge. For example, public-key cryptography could be used
and the token could encrypt the challenge string with the token’s private key.




                                                                                 18
         Hardware Authentication Tokens (1 of 4)

        ⚫ One-time password (OTP) device:
           ⚫ Has a secret key to generate an OTP
           ⚫ User enters the OTP and the system validates the value
             entered
           ⚫ Uses a block cipher/hash function to combine secret key
             and time or nonce value to create OTP
           ⚫ Has a tamper-resistant module for secure storage of the
             secret key




We now discuss other types of hardware authentication tokens that can be
used in the authentication process. These hold one or more embedded keys
unique to the device and the ability to perform cryptographic operations using
them in the authentication process.


One of the simplest hardware tokens is a one-time password (OTP) device.
This has an embedded secret key that is used as a seed to generate an OTP,
which it displays. The user enters the current OTP as part of an identity
verification process on some system. That system separately computes the
expected OTP and confirms whether the user has entered the correct value.
Each OTP may only be used once. The OTP may be a constantly changing
value, based on the current time, or it may
be generated from a counter or other value, known as a nonce, that updates
each time an OTP is used. These devices typically use a block cipher or hash
function to
cryptographically combine the secret key and the time or nonce value to create
the OTP. They also typically include some form of tamper-resistant module to
securely store the embedded secret key.




                                                                                 19
         Hardware Authentication Tokens (2 of 4)

         ⚫ Time-based one-time password (TOTP):
           ⚫ Uses HMAC with a hash function
           ⚫ Used in many hardware tokens and by many mobile
              authenticator apps
           ⚫ Password is computed from the current Unix format time
              value
         ⚫ Systems using time based OTP need to allow for clock drift
           between token and verifying system
         ⚫ Systems using nonce need to allow for failed authentication
           attempts




One of the most widely implemented OTP algorithms is “Time-based one-time
password (TOTP)” that uses HMAC with a hash function such as SHA-1 and is
specified in RFC 6238. This algorithm is used in a range of hardware tokens,
as well as by many of the mobile authenticator apps. The TOTP password is
computed from the current Unix format time value as


T = floor ((Current Unix time - Time0)/Step)
TOTP (Key,T) = Truncate(HMAC-SHA-1(Key,T))


Where the following values are selected and shared with the service being
authenticated when the authentication service is initialized.


Key = a randomly generated or derived secret value at least as large as the
hash function output
Time0 = the initial time value in seconds (default 0)
Step = the time step, or window, in seconds, used before the password is
updated (default 30)




                                                                               20
Truncate is a function that converts an HMAC-SHA-1 value into a TOTP value
and is specified in RFC 4226, which RFC 6238 extends. It truncates the hash
value
down to 32 bits and then computes a decimal value with the desired number of
digits, by default 6, from this. This value is then displayed to the user as the
current one-time password value to use. Systems can choose to use one of
the more recent SHA-256 or SHA-512 hash functions if desired, rather than
the original SHA-1, if supported by the token. They can also use a password
with 7 or 8 digits rather than the minimum of 6, if supported.


Systems using a time based OTP system have a window of some seconds or
minutes before generating a new value, as shown in the TOTP calculation.
They need to allow for possible clock drift between the token and the verifying
system. This is usually done by allowing OTP values for times within a small
window
of the current system time. If an OTP is supplied for a time slightly different to
the system clock, then the system can record the drift amount, in order to
compensate in future interactions. If the token and system drift too far out of
synchronization, then a resynchronize process must be used to reestablish
synchronization.


Systems that use a nonce need to allow for failed authentication attempts, that
mean the token is generating an OTP that is one or a few steps later than that
last
successfully used to authenticate. If such a later OTP is detected, the system
updates their nonce to match. As with time based systems, if the token and
system nonce
values are too far out of synchronization, then a resynchronize process must
be used.




                                                                                     20
         Hardware Authentication Tokens (3 of 4)

         ⚫ Disadvantage: any other person can see the code
         ⚫ Alternative: use of a communications link
         ⚫ Single-factor vs. multifactor:
           ⚫ Single-factor: provides authentication service with just
             one factor
           ⚫ Multifactor: provides authentication service after a local
             authentication step




One disadvantage of tokens that display the code for the user to enter, is that
another person can glance at the display and see the code. Hence care is
needed when
using such tokens. As an alternative, the token may use a communications link
with the authenticating system, rather than a separate display. This may
require the user to insert the token into a USB port on the system. Or it may
use a near-field communication (NFC) or low energy Bluetooth (BLE) wireless
connection. Such tokens often combine the OTP function with support for
cryptographic operations. They contain one or more embedded keys and can
perform some public or private key cryptographic operation, such as signing a
challenge value. They may also provide more general support for securing
keys and supporting a range of cryptographic operations beyond just
authentication.


NIST SP 800-63B distinguishes between single-factor and multifactor devices.
A single-factor device functions as we describe above. A multifactor device
only
provides the authentication service after some additional local authentication
step on the device. This may involve the user supplying a PIN or password via
a keyboard or sent using a USB or other communications interface, or with the




                                                                                  21
use of a biometric reader on the device.


In recent years there has been growing support for the FIDO2 authentication
protocol. This consists of the W3C Web Authentication “WebAuthn” standard
and the
FIDO Alliance “Client to Authenticator Protocol 2 (CTAP2).” These specify a
standard for the communications between authenticator token or app and an
application or server using the authentication service. It typically uses a user
agent, such as a web browser with a WebAuthn client, as an intermediary
between the authenticator and the authenticating service. Two prominent
members of the FIDO Alliance, Google and Microsoft, both use FIDO2 to allow
the use of authenticator tokens or apps as a second authentication factor.




                                                                                   21
         Authentication Using a Mobile Phone (1
                         of 2)

        ⚫ Authentication code via message:
          ⚫ One of the simplest authentication approaches
           ⚫ Used for banking, government service access, etc.
           ⚫ No need to have any additional app on the phone
           ⚫ Disadvantage:
              ⚫ Requires mobile coverage to receive SMS
              ⚫ When mobile phone is lost or stolen, user will lose access or an
                 attacker might gain access
              ⚫ Attackers might use a SIM swap attack
              ⚫ Attacker might also intercept messages using either a fake mobile
                 tower, or by attacking SS7 signaling protocol




Mobile (or cell) phones are increasingly used as an authentication token. The
authentication process can use a code sent to the phone via either SMS or a
voice message, which the user must then enter to verify their identity when
logging in to a system. Or it may involve an app on the phone, which can
function as a one-time password generator, or engage in an active exchange
with the system where the user is verifying their identity. The main advantage
of using a mobile phone as an authentication token is that it is something
many users already own, carry with them, and use for a wide variety of
applications.


Sending an authentication code to a mobile phone with an SMS or voice
message is one of the simplest approaches to using a mobile phone as an
authentication token. This form of authentication has been used for banking,
government service access, and other uses for more than a decade. It has the
advantage of not requiring any additional app on the phone. Indeed it can be
used with even a basic feature phone without the ability to install additional
apps.


However, there are a number of disadvantages with this approach [JOVE20].
First, you need mobile coverage to receive the SMS or voice message. This




                                                                                    22
method
does not work if the user’s phone does not have service. Mobile phones may
also be lost or stolen. If this occurs, then the user will lose access until they
can acquire a new phone, and transfer their phone number to it. And if the
phone is stolen by an attacker who has also gained access to the user’s
account name and password, they may be able to access the user’s accounts
on systems for a period. Attackers may also try to transfer the user’s phone
number to a new phone under their control, using a SIM swap attack. This
widely used attack exploits deficiencies in phone companies customer support
services used to transfer a phone number when a user changes their phone.
While phone companies should check the validity of such transfer requests,
there are numerous examples when these checks have been inadequate, a
number has been transferred without the correct authorization, and then used
to gain access to the legitimate user’s accounts [LKMN20]. If the number is
successfully transferred, the attacker receives all calls and SMS messages,
including authentication messages, sent to that phone number. Another attack
exploits the recovery options that allow a user to reset the phone number used
for authentication. If the attacker has access to the user’s emails, they may be
able to change the phone number used for these messages and then gain
access to the user’s accounts.


It is also possible, though technically harder, for an attacker to intercept the
SMS or voice message using either a fake mobile tower, or by attacking the
underlying SS7 signaling protocol used by phone companies to manage calls
and messages. Because of these various limitations and security concerns,
NIST SP 800-63B classifies authentication using SMS messages as restricted,
with other alternatives encouraged. However it continues to be widely used for
the reasons described above. And because, even with these concerns, it is still
significantly more secure than just using a password alone.




                                                                                    22
         Authentication Using a Mobile Phone (2
                         of 2)

         ⚫ Mobile authentication apps:
           ⚫ Implements a one-time password generator
           ⚫ Implements the “Time-based one-time password (TOTP)” algorithm
           ⚫ Does not require a network connection
           ⚫ Can be used with multiple accounts
           ⚫ More secure than authentication code
           ⚫ Disadvantages:
              ⚫ Phone might be lost or stolen
              ⚫ Attacker might compromise by installing malware
              ⚫ Attacker might convince the user to reveal secret code




Alternatively, authentication may involve the use of an app installed on the
user’s mobile phone. The app usually implements a one-time password
generator, as
an alternative to a dedicated hardware token. There are widely accepted apps
that provide this functionality from Microsoft, Google, and others. These apps
mostly
implement the “Time-based one-time password (TOTP)” algorithm. They have
the advantage of not requiring a network connection when used. These
authentication apps may be used with multiple accounts. If an authentication
app is used, it is important that the user generate and securely store backup
codes for the app. These allow the app to be reinstalled on a new device if the
original is lost or stolen. The use of an authentication app is generally regarded
as more secure than sending an authentication code by SMS or phone
message.


Disadvantages of this approach include the phone being lost or stolen, an
attacker compromising the phone by installing malware, which subverts the
authentication process, an attacker sending large numbers of authentication
requests, known as “prompt-bombing” in the hope the user will just approve
the access, or an attacker using social engineering to convince the user to




                                                                                     23
reveal the authentication code. These latter attacks highlight the need for user
awareness training, so that they only approve authentication requests they
have initiated from their systems. [OZBI20] describes how the authors
recovered the secret key values from seven common authentication apps
installed on an Android phone, despite the security protections Android
provides for apps. This highlights that if an attacker has physical access to the
device, its security may be compromised. [DLRS14] explores a range of
attacks on mobile device authenticator apps, including infection of the PC the
user authenticates with, infection of the mobile device, and attacks on the
initialization and recovery mechanisms used by the authentication apps. Again,
as with the use of SMS messages for authentication, although there are risks
in using an authentication app, which should be mitigated, there use provides
considerably greater security than just using a password alone.


Because of these concerns, NIST SP 800-63B specifies some requirements
when mobile phones are used as authenticators. These include that the user
uses the phone unlock mechanism before the authenticator app provides the
one-time code, to provide additional protection for such devices.




                                                                                    23
        Figure 3.2
        Multifactor Authentication




Multifactor authentication (MFA) refers to an authentication process where the
user presents two or more pieces of evidence (or factors) to verify their
identity, as shown in Figure 3.2. This usually involves a combination of the
methods based on something they know, possess, are or do. For example,
many online banking systems require the user to first enter a password
(something they know) and then enter a code sent by SMS to their mobile
phone (something they possess). Using multiple factors creates a system that
is stronger and more resistant to compromise than using any single factor.
Because of this, NIST SP 800-63B requires the use of multiple authentication
methods for higher authentication assurance levels. MFA may also be highly
recommended or required by governments for some industries.


The most common form of MFA used by larger organizations to verify the
identity of their staff uses a physical token, often a one-time password (OTP)
device. These require the user to provide a login and password and then enter
the OTP code from their token. For the general public, MFA authentication
most commonly uses a mobile device to either receive a code sent via SMS or
voice call, or to generate an OTP code using an authenticator app.


Whichever approach is taken, any organization planning to introduce MFA




                                                                                 24
needs to ensure their systems can support the chosen approach. This may be
problematic for older legacy systems, which may require costly additional
changes to provide this support. [LBJR11] details their conclusions after
surveying a range of organizations at that time on their use of MFA. They
found that the choice of MFA depended on which sector the organization was
in. Defense and areas of government had higher acceptance than the health
sector. They found that user resistance to using MFA was not an issue once it
was adopted and that tokens were more common than biometrics. MFA
adoption was usually part of a broader security architecture, and that
government mandates and public perception also encouraged MFA adoption.
They concluded that more guidance was needed to assist organizations
adopting MFA and on how best to structure their secure use when user
computers may be compromised with malware.


While using MFA improves the security of the authentication process, it is still
vulnerable to social engineering or phishing attacks in particular, as well as to
attacks using malware to intercept the authentication codes.


Long Description:
During the multifactor authentication process, the client exchanges
authentication protocol with authentication logic using the first factor. If the
message fails, the authentication protocol drops. If the message passes, the
client’s authentication protocol must then pass the authentication logic using
the second factor, and the similar process goes on.




                                                                                    24
                                                    Biometric Authentication
                                  ⚫ attempts to authenticate an individual based on unique
                                           physical characteristics
                                  ⚫ based on pattern recognition
                                  ⚫ is technically complex and expensive when compared to
                                           passwords and tokens
                                  ⚫ physical characteristics used include:
                                      ⚫ facial characteristics
                                      ⚫ fingerprints
                                      ⚫ hand geometry
                                      ⚫ retinal pattern
                                      ⚫ iris
                                      ⚫ signature
                                      ⚫ voice




A biom etric aut henti cat ion s y st em att empt s t o aut hentic ate an i ndivi dual bas ed on
his or her unique phys ic al charac teris ti cs . Thes e i nclude s tat ic c harac t eri st ic s, s uc h
as f ingerprints , hand geom etry , fac ial c harac t eri st ic s, and retinal and i ri s patt erns;
and dynam ic c haract erist ic s, s uc h as v oic eprint and s ignat ure. In ess enc e, biomet rics
is bas ed on pat tern rec ognit ion. Compared t o pas s words and t okens , biom etric
aut hentic ati on is bot h t ec hnical ly c omplex and ex pensiv e. While it is us ed in a
num ber of s pecif ic appli cat ions , biomet rics has yet t o m ature as a s t andard tool f or
us er aut hentic ati on t o c omput er s ys t ems .

A num ber of dif ferent ty pes of phy s ical c haract erist ic s are eit her in us e or under
s tudy f or us er aut hentic at ion. The mos t com mon are t he f ollowing:

• Faci al characteri sti cs: F acial characteri stics are the mo st com m on m eans
of hum an-t o-hum an ident ifi cat ion; thus it is nat ural t o consi der them f or
ident ifi cat ion by com puter. The mos t c omm on approac h is to define charac teris t ics
bas ed on relativ e locat ion and s hape of k ey f acial f eatures , suc h as
ey es, ey ebrows, nos e, lips , and chin s hape. An alternat ive approach is t o us e an
inf rared c amera t o produc e a fac e thermogram t hat correlat es with the underly ing
v asc ular sy s tem in the human fac e.

• Fi ng erprin ts: Fi ngerp rin ts have been used as a m eans of i denti ficatio n fo r
c enturies , and t he proc es s has been s y st emat iz ed and autom ated partic ularly
f or law enf orcem ent purposes . A f ingerpri nt is the patt ern of ridges and
f urrows on the surf ace of the fi ngert ip. Fi ngerprint s are bel ieved to be uni que
ac ross t he ent ire hum an popul ation. I n prac tic e, aut omat ed f ingerpri nt rec ognit ion
and mat ching s ys tem ex t rac t a number of f eatures f rom the fingerprint
f or s torage as a num eri cal s urrogat e f or t he f ull f ingerprint patt ern.

• Hand geo metry: Han d geom etry system s i denti fy features of the han d,
inc luding shape, and lengt hs and widt hs of fi ngers .

• Retin al pattern: T he p attern form ed by vein s ben eath th e retin al surface i s
unique and t herefore s uit able f or ident if icat ion. A reti nal biom etric sy s tem
obt ains a di gital im age of t he reti nal pat tern by project ing a low-int ensi ty
beam of v is ual or infrared l ight into the ey e.

• I ris: An other uni que ph ysical characteri stic is th e d etai led structu re of the i ris.

• S ign ature: E ach ind ivi dual h as a uni qu e style of hand writi ng and thi s i s
refl ect ed es pec ially in the s ignature, whic h is ty pic ally a frequentl y wri tt en
s equence. Howev er, mult iple signat ure s ampl es from a singl e indiv idual will
not be identic al. T his c omplic at es the tas k of dev eloping a c omput er represent ati on
of t he s ignature that c an be mat c hed t o f uture s am ples.

• V oice: Whereas th e si gnatu re style of an i nd ivi dual refl ects no t on ly th e u niq ue
phy si cal att ributes of the writ er but als o the writ ing habit that has dev eloped,
v oic e pat terns are m ore c los ely t ied t o t he phy s ical and anatom ical c haract erist ic s
of t he s peaker. Nev ertheles s , there i s st ill a v ariat ion f rom sam ple t o s am ple ov er
t ime from t he s ame speak er, c omplic at ing t he biom etric rec ognit ion t as k.




                                                                                                           25
                         Figure 3.5
                   Cost Versus Accuracy




Figure 3.5 gives a rough indication of the relative cost and accuracy of these
biometric measures. The concept of accuracy does not apply to user
authentication
schemes using smart cards or passwords. For example, if a user enters a
password,
it either matches exactly the password expected for that user or not. In the
case of
biometric parameters, the system instead must determine how closely a
presented
biometric characteristic matches a stored characteristic. Before elaborating on
the
concept of biometric accuracy, we need to have a general idea of how
biometric
systems work.




                                                                                  26
          Figure 3.6

       Operation of
       a Biometric
         System

                                      F igure 3.6 A Generic Biometric Syste m Enrollm ent creates an
                                      asso ciation between a user and the user’s biometric characteristics.
                                      Dep endin g on the application, user au thentication either involves verifying
                                      that a claime d user is the actual user or ide ntifying an unknown user.




Figure 3.6 illustrates the operation of a biometric system. Each individual who
is to be
included in the database of authorized users must first be enrolled in the
system. This
is analogous to assigning a password to a user. For a biometric system, the
user presents
a name and, typically, some type of password or PIN to the system. At the
same
time the system senses some biometric characteristic of this user (e.g.,
fingerprint of
right index finger). The system digitizes the input and then extracts a set of
features
that can be stored as a number or set of numbers representing this unique
biometric
characteristic; this set of numbers is referred to as the user’s template. The
user is now
enrolled in the system, which maintains for the user a name (ID), perhaps a
PIN or
password, and the biometric value.



                                                                                                                       27
Depending on application, user authentication on a biometric system involves
either verification or identification. Verification is analogous to a user
logging on
to a system by using a memory card or smart card coupled with a password or
PIN.
For biometric verification, the user enters a PIN and also uses a biometric
sensor.
The system extracts the corresponding feature and compares that to the
template
stored for this user. If there is a match, then the system authenticates this
user.


For an identification system, the individual uses the biometric sensor but
presents no additional information. The system then compares the presented
template with the set of stored templates. If there is a match, then this user is
identified. Otherwise, the user is rejected.




                                                                                    27
                     Biometric Accuracy




In any biometric scheme, some physical characteristic of the individual is
mapped
into a digital representation. For each individual, a single digital representation,
or template, is stored in the computer. When the user is to be authenticated,
the system compares the stored template to the presented template. Given the
complexities of
physical characteristics, we cannot expect that there will be an exact match
between
the two templates. Rather, the system uses an algorithm to generate a
matching
score (typically a single number) that quantifies the similarity between the input
and the stored template.


Figure 3.7 illustrates the dilemma posed to the system. If a single user is
tested
by the system numerous times, the matching score s will vary, with a
probability
density function typically forming a bell curve, as shown. For example, in the
case of



                                                                                       28
a fingerprint, results may vary due to sensor noise; changes in the print due to
swelling,
dryness, and so on; finger placement; and so on. On average, any other
individual
should have a much lower matching score but again will exhibit a bell-shaped
probability
density function. The difficulty is that the range of matching scores produced
by two individuals, one genuine and one an imposter, compared to a given
reference
template, are likely to overlap. In Figure 3.7 a threshold value is selected thus
that if
the presented value s Ú t a match is assumed, and for s 6 t, a mismatch is
assumed.
The shaded part to the right of t indicates a range of values for which a false
match is
possible, and the shaded part to the left indicates a range of values for which a
false
nonmatch is possible. The area of each shaded part represents the probability
of a
false match or nonmatch, respectively. By moving the threshold, left or right,
the
probabilities can be altered, but note that a decrease in false match rate
necessarily
results in an increase in false nonmatch rate, and vice versa.




                                                                                    28
           Remote User Authentication

         ⚫ authentication over a network, the Internet, or a
            communications link is more complex
         ⚫ additional security threats such as:

              ⚫ eavesdropping, capturing a password, replaying an
                 authentication sequence that has been observed

         ⚫ generally rely on some form of a challenge-response
            protocol to counter threats




The simplest form of user authentication is local authentication, in which a user
attempts to access a system that is locally present, such as a stand-alone
office PC or
an ATM machine. The more complex case is that of remote user
authentication,
which takes place over the Internet, a network, or a communications link.
Remote
user authentication raises additional security threats, such as an eavesdropper
being
able to capture a password, or an adversary replaying an authentication
sequence
that has been observed.


To counter threats to remote user authentication, systems generally rely on
some
form of challenge-response protocol. In this section, we present the basic
elements of
such protocols for each of the types of authenticators discussed in this
chapter.



                                                                                    29
                               Figure 3.10a
                            Password Protocol
                                                  ⚫ user transmits identity to
                                                    remote host
                                                  ⚫ host generates a random
                                                    number (nonce)
                                                  ⚫ nonce is returned to the user
                                                  ⚫ host stores a hash code of the
                                                    password
                                                  ⚫ function in which the password
                                                    hash is one of the arguments
                 Example of a                     ⚫ use of a random number helps
              challenge-response                    defend against an adversary
                    protocol                        capturing the user’s
                                                    transmission



Figure 3.10a provides a simple example of a challenge-response protocol for
authentication via password. Actual protocols are more complex, such as Kerberos,
discussed in Chapter 23. In this example, a user first transmits his or her identity to
the remote host. The host generates a random number r, often called a nonce, and
returns this nonce to the user. In addition, the host specifies two functions, h() and
f(), to be used in the response. This transmission from host to user is the challenge.
The user’s response is the quantity f(r, h(P)), where r r and P is the user’s
password. The function h is a hash function, so that the response consists of the
hash function of the user’s password combined with the random number using the
function f.

The host stores the hash function of each register user’s password, depicted
as h(P(U)) for user U. When the response arrives, the host compares the incoming
f(r, h(P)) to the calculated f(r, h(P(U))). If the quantities match, the user is
authenticated.

This scheme defends against several forms of attack. The host stores not the
password but a hash code of the password. As discussed in Section 3.2, this secures
the password from intruders into the host system. In addition, not even the hash of
the password is transmitted directly, but rather a function in which the password hash
is one of the arguments. Thus, for a suitable function f, the password hash cannot be
captured during transmission. Finally, the use of a random number as one of the arguments
of f defends against a replay attack, in which an adversary captures the user’s
transmission and attempts to log on to a system by retransmitting the user’s messages.




                                                                                            30
                               Figure 3.10b
                              Token Protocol
         ⚫ user transmits identity to
           the remote host
         ⚫ host returns a random
           number and identifiers
         ⚫ token either stores a static
           passcode or generates a one-
           time random passcode
         ⚫ user activates passcode by
           entering a password                         Example of a
         ⚫ password is shared between                 token protocol
           the user and token and does
           not involve the remote host




Figure 3.10b provides a simple example of a token protocol for authentication.
As before, a user first transmits his or her identity to the remote host. The host
returns a random number and the identifiers of functions f() and h() to be used in the
response. At the user end, the token provides a passcode W. The token either stores
a static passcode or generates a one-time random passcode. For a one-time random
passcode, the token must be synchronized in some fashion with the host. In either
case, the user activates the passcode by entering a password P. This password is
shared only between the user and the token and does not involve the remote host.
The token responds to the host with the quantity f(r, h(W)). For a static passcode,
the host stores the hashed value h(W(U)); for a dynamic passcode, the host
generates
a one-time passcode (synchronized to that generated by the token) and takes its
hash. Authentication then proceeds in the same fashion as for the password protocol.




                                                                                         31
                         Figure 3.10c
                  Static Biometric Protocol
                                          ⚫ user transmits an ID to the
                                            host
                                          ⚫ host responds with a random
                                            number and the identifier for
                                            an encryption
                                          ⚫ client system controls
                                            biometric device on user side
                                          ⚫ host decrypts incoming
                                            message and compares these
                 Example of a               to locally stored values
                static biometric          ⚫ host provides authentication
                    protocol                by comparing the incoming
                                            device ID to a list of registered
                                            devices at the host database



Figure 3.10c is an example of a user authentication protocol using a static
biometric.
As before, the user transmits an ID to the host, which responds with a random
number r and, in this case, the identifier for an encryption E(). On the user side
is
a client system that controls a biometric device. The system generates a
biometric
template BT from the user’s biometric B and returns the ciphertext E(r, D,
BT), where D identifies this particular biometric device. The host decrypts the
incoming message to recover the three transmitted parameters and compares
these
to locally stored values. For a match, the host must find r r. Also, the matching
score between BT and the stored template must exceed a predefined
threshold.
Finally, the host provides a simple authentication of the biometric capture
device by
comparing the incoming device ID to a list of registered devices at the host
database.




                                                                                     32
                     Figure 3.10d
               Dynamic Biometric Protocol
       ⚫ host provides a random
         sequence and a random
         number as a challenge              Example of a
       ⚫ sequence challenge is a          dynamic biometric
         sequence of numbers,                 protocol
         characters, or words
       ⚫ user at client end must then
         vocalize, type, or write the
         sequence to generate a
         biometric signal
       ⚫ the client side encrypts the
         biometric signal and the
         random number
       ⚫ host decrypts message and
         generates a comparison



Figure 3.10d is an example of a user authentication protocol using a dynamic
biometric. The principal difference from the case of a stable biometric is that
the
host provides a random sequence as well as a random number as a challenge.
The
sequence challenge is a sequence of numbers, characters, or words. The
human
user at the client end must then vocalize (speaker verification), type (keyboard
dynamics verification), or write (handwriting verification) the sequence to
generate
a biometric signal BS(x). The client side encrypts the biometric signal and
the random number. At the host side, the incoming message is decrypted. The
incoming random number r must be an exact match to the random number
that
was originally used as a challenge (r). In addition, the host generates a
comparison
based on the incoming biometric signal BS(x), the stored template BT(U) for
this user and the original signal x. If the comparison value exceeds a
predefined
threshold, the user is authenticated.




                                                                                   33
                                                     Table 3.4

                                                Potential Attacks,
                                                   Susceptible
                                                 Authenticators,
                                                   and Typical
                                                    Defenses




As with any security service, user authentication, particularly remote user
authentication,
is subject to a variety of attacks. Table 3.4, from [OGOR03], summarizes
the principal attacks on user authentication, broken down by type of
authenticator.
Much of the table is self-explanatory. In this section, we expand on some of
the
table’s entries.




                                                                               34
                                                 eavesdropping
                                                adversary attempts to
                                                learn the password by
                                               some sort of attac k that
                                                 involves th e ph ysical            host attacks
              denial-of-service                  proximity of user and
                                                       adversary                directed at the user file
               attempts to disable a                                               at the host where
                user auth en tic ation                                             passwords, token
              service by flood ing the                                          passcodes, or b iometric
              service with numerous                                              templates are stored
             auth en tic ation attempts

                                          Authentication
                                          Security Issues
                      Trojan horse                                                         replay
                     an applicatio n or
                      physic al devic e                                              adversary rep eats a
                    masquerades as an                                                previously captured
                 auth en tic app lication or
                                                      client attacks                    user response
                 device for the purpose of         adversary attempts to
                     capturing a user                    achieve u ser
                  password, passcod e, o r         auth en tic ation with out
                         biometric                   access to the remote
                                                   host or the intervening
                                                    communications path




Client attacks are those in which an adversary attempts to achieve user
authentication without access to the remote host or to the intervening
communications
path. The adversary attempts to masquerade as a legitimate user. For a
password-
based system, the adversary may attempt to guess the likely user password.
Multiple guesses may be made. At the extreme, the adversary sequences
through
all possible passwords in an exhaustive attempt to succeed. One way to thwart
such
an attack is to select a password that is both lengthy and unpredictable. In
effect,
such a password has large entropy; that is, many bits are required to represent
the
password. Another countermeasure is to limit the number of attempts that can
be
made in a given time period from a given source.
A token can generate a high-entropy passcode from a low-entropy PIN or




                                                                                                            35
password, thwarting exhaustive searches. The adversary may be able to
guess or
acquire the PIN or password but must additionally acquire the physical token
to
succeed.


Host attacks are directed at the user file at the host where passwords,
token
passcodes, or biometric templates are stored. Section 3.2 discusses the
security
considerations with respect to passwords. For tokens, there is the additional
defense of using one-time passcodes, so that passcodes are not stored in a
host
passcode file. Biometric features of a user are difficult to secure because they
are
physical features of the user. For a static feature, biometric device
authentication
adds a measure of protection. For a dynamic feature, a challenge-response
protocol enhances security.


Eavesdropping in the context of passwords refers to an adversary’s
attempt
to learn the password by observing the user, finding a written copy of the
password,
or some similar attack that involves the physical proximity of user and
adversary.
Another form of eavesdropping is keystroke logging (keylogging), in which
malicious hardware or software is installed so that the attacker can capture the
user’s keystrokes for later analysis. A system that relies on multiple factors
(e.g.,
password plus token or password plus biometric) is resistant to this type of
attack.
For a token, an analogous threat is theft of the token or physical copying of
the
token. Again, a multifactor protocol resists this type of attack better than a pure




                                                                                      35
token protocol. The analogous threat for a biometric protocol is copying or
imitating
the biometric parameter so as to generate the desired template. Dynamic
biometrics
are less susceptible to such attacks. For static biometrics, device
authentication is a
useful countermeasure.


Replay attacks involve an adversary repeating a previously captured
user response. The most common countermeasure to such attacks is the
challenge-response
protocol.


In a Trojan horse attack, an application or physical device masquerades
as
an authentic application or device for the purpose of capturing a user
password,
passcode, or biometric. The adversary can then use the captured information
to
masquerade as a legitimate user. A simple example of this is a rogue bank
machine
used to capture user ID/password combinations.


A denial-of-service attack attempts to disable a user authentication
service by
flooding the service with numerous authentication attempts. A more selective
attack
denies service to a specific user by attempting logon until the threshold is
reached
that causes lockout to this user because of too many logon attempts. A
multifactor
authentication protocol that includes a token thwarts this attack, because the
adversary must first acquire the token.




                                                                                 35
                       Kerberos
⚫ Kerberos is an authentication protocol and a software suite
  implementing this protocol.
⚫ Kerberos uses symmetric cryptography to authenticate clients to
  services and vice versa.
⚫ For example, Windows servers use Kerberos as the primary
  authentication mechanism, working in conjunction with Active
  Directory to maintain centralized user information.
⚫ Other possible uses of Kerberos include allowing users to log into
  other machines in a local-area network, authentication for web
  services, authenticating email client and servers, and
  authenticating the use of devices such as printers.

⚫ Services using Kerberos authentication are commonly referred to
  as “Kerberized”.               36




                                                                       36
                 Kerberos Tickets
⚫ Kerberos uses the concept of a ticket as a token that proves
  the identity of a user.

⚫ Tickets are digital documents that store session keys. They
  are typically issued during a login session and then can be
  used instead of passwords for any Kerberized services. During
  the course of authentication, a client receives two tickets:
  ⚫ A ticket-granting ticket (TGT), which acts as a global identifier for a
     user and a session key
  ⚫ A service ticket, which authenticates a user to a particular service

⚫ These tickets include time stamps that indicate an expiration
  time after which they become invalid. This expiration time
  can be set by Kerberos administrators depending on the
                             37
  service.




                                                                              37
                   Kerberos Servers
⚫ To accomplish secure authentication, Kerberos uses a trusted third party
   known as a key distribution center (KDC), which is composed of two
   components, typically integrated into a single server:
   ⚫   An authentication server (AS), which performs user authentication
   ⚫   A ticket-granting server (TGS), which grants tickets to users

⚫ The authentication server keeps a database storing the secret keys of the
   users and services. The secret key of a user is typically generated by
   performing a one-way hash of the user-provided password. Kerberos is
   designed to be modular, so that it can be used with a number of
   encryption protocols, with AES being the default cryptosystem.

⚫ Kerberos aims to centralize authentication for an entire network—rather
   than storing sensitive authentication information at each user’s machine,
   this data is only maintained in one presumably secure location.
                                          38




                                                                               38
      Kerberos Authentication
⚫ The client and authentication
  server authenticate themselves
  to each other.

⚫ The client and ticket-granting
  server authenticate themselves
  to each other.

⚫ The client and requested
  service authenticate
  themselves to each other, at
  which point the service will be
  provided to the client.
                              39




                                    39
Authentication Details




          40




                         40
Authentication Details




          41




                         41
Authentication Details




          42




                         42
               Kerberos Advantages
⚫   The Kerberos protocol is designed to be secure even when performed over an insecure
    network.

⚫   Since each transmission is encrypted using an appropriate secret key, an attacker cannot forge
    a valid ticket to gain unauthorized access to a service without compromising an encryption key
    or breaking the underlying encryption algorithm, which is assumed to be secure.

⚫   Kerberos is also designed to protect against replay attacks, where an attacker eavesdrops
    legitimate Kerberos communications and retransmits messages from an authenticated party
    to perform unauthorized actions.
    ⚫   Th e inclusion of time stamps in Kerberos messages restricts the windo w in whic h an attacker can
        retransmit messages.
    ⚫   Tickets may contain the IP ad dresses associated with the auth en tic ated party to prevent
        replaying messages from a dif feren t IP address.
    ⚫   Kerberized services make use of a “rep lay c ach e,” which stores previous auth en tication token s
        and detects their reuse.

⚫   Kerberos makes use of symmetric encryption instead of public-key encryption, which makes
    Kerberos computationally efficient

⚫   The availability of an open-source implementation has facilitated the adoption of Kerberos.

                                                    43




                                                                                                              43
      Kerberos Disadvantages
⚫ Kerberos has a single point of failure: if the Key
  Distribution Center becomes unavailable, the
  authentication scheme for an entire network may cease to
  function.
  ⚫ Larger networks sometimes prevent such a scenario by
     having multiple KDCs, or having backup KDCs available in
     case of emergency.

⚫ If an attacker compromises the KDC, the authentication
  information of every client and server on the network
  would be revealed.
⚫ Kerberos requires that all participating parties have
  synchronized clocks, since time stamps are used.
                               44




                                                                44
                                          Summary
       ⚫   four means of authenticating a user ’s       ⚫   password selection strategies
           identity                                          ⚫   user education
            ⚫   something the individual knows               ⚫   computer generated passwords
            ⚫   something the individual possesses           ⚫   reactive password checking
            ⚫   something the individual is                  ⚫   proactive password checking
            ⚫   something the individual does           ⚫   Bloom filter
       ⚫   vulnerability of passwords                   ⚫   token based authentication
            ⚫   offline dictionary attack                    ⚫ memory cards
            ⚫   specific account attack                      ⚫ smart cards
            ⚫   popular password attack                 ⚫   biometric authentication
            ⚫   password guessing against single user
            ⚫   workstation hijacking                   ⚫   remote user authentication
                                                             ⚫   password protocol
            ⚫   exploiting user mistakes
                                                             ⚫   token protocol
            ⚫   exploiting multiple password use
            ⚫   electronic monitoring                        ⚫   static biometric protocol
                                                             ⚫   dynamic biometric protocol
       ⚫   hashed password and salt value
       ⚫   password file access control




Chapter 3 summary.




                                                                                                45
